# Contemporary Issues In Data
In the following document, I will talk briefly about the issues present in data privacy, and how we can begin to take action. The two articles that I will examine take two differing views on the matter, specifically as to whether or not we are even prepared to begin to move towards solving the issue, with one stating that there are ways and the other maintaining that we have yet to even discover the full extent of what is the tip of an iceberg.

## 5 ways to finally fix data privacy in America
Venturebeat is confident that data privacy is an easily fixable issue, and says as much in their article, ["5 ways to finally fix data privacy in America"](https://venturebeat.com/2021/01/29/5-ways-to-finally-fix-data-privacy-in-america/). The author, Harry Maugans, sees it as a "simple and straightforward" problem, and one that can be fixed with similarly reasonable solutions. The first is to "make privacy opt-in", which does exactly what it sounds like. The issue with this is that there is no difference between this supposedly revolutionary option to "opt-in" to privacy and the already present options on many sites to opt out of data sharing. The only difference between the two is that the first option is slightly clearer on the effects of the button; however, the "complication" of whether or not to allow data sharing is easily mitigated by a quick search on what exactly data sharing is. _That_ isn't the issue; the issue lies not in what consumers can do, but what companies can. That leads to the problem within the second proposed solution: "require plain english privacy policies". I imagine, as a consumer, that the most prominent obstacle in understanding of privacy policies isn't the language, but the length. Of course, difficult language plays a huge role, but even a single page full of complicated jargon can be easily tackled. The length, on the other hand, would still be significant even in the face of the simplification of the language/vocabulary used. No matter how simplified the language is, when you're creating a new account with some site or another, often the last thing people want to do is still in front of their screen and read twenty pages of technical/legal jargon. Therefore, the first two "solutions" are a bust.
 
The last three, however, sound much more reasonable. "Mandate privacy labels", "give data an expiration date", and "make protecting data cheaper than abusing it" are all solid proposals that strike closer to the heart of the problem. Protecting their data has been made out to be as if it is the responsibility of the consumers, when it really should always have been on the companies that are taking and utilizing this data. This article does seem to grasp that concept. It might be skepticism or pessimism, but with regards to something as important as data, it cannot be simply left up to _trusting_ companies not to screw you over; it needs to be guaranteed. Now, that might seem to be the true heart of the problem, but after reading both of these articles, I disagreed. Forbes talks more about some of the issues that I find important, but in the end their article still made a different conclusion than I did.

## Data Privacy Abuse Continues Because We Struggle To Define The Problem
In the Forbes article ["Data Privacy Abuse Continues Because We Struggle To Define The Problem"](https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesbusinessdevelopmentcouncil/2021/01/04/data-privacy-abuse-continues-because-we-struggle-to-define-the-problem/?sh=cc200da32e9e), author Vijay Sundaram speaks scathingly \(albeit accurately\) about companies "\[violating\] a basic right to privacy to line their own pockets." They're not wrong that data privacy, notably different from data security, is often misunderstood to the public. More crucially, they understand that it is the "unsuspecting people" who bear the brunt end of this misunderstanding. Just because having "more and better data on potential customers is seen as a competitive advantage in today's business landscape" does not mean that companies should exhaust every loophole to obtain that advantage.

I say loopholes, but in reality the real need to exploit loopholes is all but nonexistent. Sure, you can find some regulations on what privacy rights look like, specifically focusing on "consent, notification, and transparency", but when you take a hard look at what real protection your data has in the way of legality, the list is a fairly sparse one.

But _why_ is it exactly that the advancement of data privacy protections are so slow? _Why_ is it that regulations are so slow to develop? Some of it is due to public interest, to be sure. Policies that gain overwhelming public support are the policies which are most pressured to be reviewed, revised, and improved. Without public momentum, it can be quite easy to neglect certain areas of legislation. A more jaded view, and my view as well, is this: the companies that are most guilty of violating their customers/consumers' data privacy are also the companies that have, over the years, gained power and influence through their popularity or through their essentiality. The road to true data privacy is long and arduous, if only because it is not legislation that we are fighting, but companies themselves - and they have a hell of a lot more time, patience, and resources than we do.